### Car theft

The cost is now over a [billion dollars per year](https://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/the-top-10-stolen-cars-in-canada-1004240044/) - just in Canada. 

And according to the article, some car models come with a 1+% chance of disappearance each year. On a $40,000 car that averages out to $400 per year - $33 per month - in replacement cost plus side effects. By side effects I mean law enforcement investigation cost, inconvenience and time and effort and overhead to make a claim, lost personal items in the car and being stranded on discovery of the theft, the encouraging effect where a "successful" theft leads to more theft attempts that will cause further car losses in the future (possible exponential growth), and negative consequences from funding criminal activities.

# Push-to-start vehicle thefts

> The vehicles that are being stolen are the higher end and newer model vehicles  ... They’re all push-to-start vehicles, with the exception of the Chevy pickup truck, which is a much older moder

The simplicity of the push-to-start theft is remarkable: extend the keyless entry system signal to the car and off you go.

Here are a few things that I think could be done:
                                                          
# Prevent the signal from being stolen

We could design the fob to have an [accelerometer](https://spectrum.ieee.org/how-accelerometers-will-soon-thwart-car-thieves) and only transmit when the fob is or has recently been in motion. 

Say you return home and place the fob on your counter. After 30 seconds the transmitter could shut off. No more signal would be out there to steal but when you pick it up and walk to the car it would turn back on and work as expected. This would be better for battery life and far more secure.

We could even take it a level further and have the fob regularly send acceleration readings (ax,ay,az), a current time or random token (t), and a signed passcode P=f(ax,ay,az,t) to the car as a message (ax,ay,az,t,P). The car can then check similarity with its acceleration readings and verify the signing of the message. The accelerations should match closely and the message should be properly signed. The car could then require ongoing verified contact with the fob to run.

# Prevent the car from starting

The fob could open the door and then a second form of authentication starts the car.

Would people be comfortable starting their car with facial recognition or by drawing a pattern on the entertainment console? Could we talk to the car and use voice recognition? Logging in to the car would grant access to our favourite music or maybe adjust the mirrors for us and bring up our top ten destination selections. Offering all the above options might be nice.

I think I would prefer the voice recognition: the car could say "Hello, where are we going today?". I could then say "to the office" and it would bring up a suggested driving route including traffic information. Each person could have their own sort of prompt. "What kind of music today?". Play "Me and Bobby McGee".

I suppose a thief could get around this by recording your voice but it would be trickier to have a valid keyless entry system code and recordings of your voice.

# See where the car is going and how it is driving: shutdown remotely or intervene

The key would be installing a [vehicle tracking system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vehicle_tracking_system) and reporting back using a wireless data connection. Perhaps it could be on the [diagnostics port](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On-board_diagnostics) but ideally it would be tricky for thieves to remove.

A side benefit from vehicle tracking would be the ability to reduce insurance premiumns through car insurance [telematics](https://www.sonnet.ca/blog/auto/insurance/what-is-usage-based-insurance) program. The installation and monthly cost of such a system could be funded by the insurance company and repaid with a tab sort of system as is often done for cellphones. The car would need some kind of mobile data (to share location data) but could still be self-funding if the entire system can be less than the $33 per month theft risk. Businesses might see additional value tracking their fleets and having information on their worker locations and timing.

Granting access to your time and location would allow for better assessment of your risk level: knowing if you drive aggressively, a lot or a little, and what unique risks and road conditions you might be facing like high congestion or dangerous intersections. Could also see how other car users are driving.

This kind of feedback from car companies could lead to safer driving. I might not realize how often I am distracted when driving or be over-confident. Apparently [80%](https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/ca/news/breaking-news/80-of-drivers-think-theyre-safer-than-others-on-the-road--survey-97058.aspx) or even [93%](https://www.smithlawco.com/blog/2017/december/do-most-drivers-really-think-they-are-above-aver) of drivers think they are safer others on the road. Maybe this would debunk things a little by comparing how often I appear to distracted, brake hard, leave the lane, to others and roll it into a risk score. Might be a bit dark but we could correlate risk scores to accidents per million km driven and report back to users.

Feedback could also help drivers decide when or where to travel. Car insurance could be priced based on where and time. So if I'm in rush-hour traffic in a high-collision area the rate is high. Or if I'm driving up to go cross country ski in the mountains (probably the most dangerous driving I do, I think?) then maybe I pay more. The cost could change based on weather conditions and be displayed on my car entertainment system just how we display litres per km of gas usage. Perhaps the cost of the trip gets sent to me after the trip although doubt that would help customer retention.

Some logic could also be built to send a warning if your location is thought to be at X, your partner is thought to be at Y, the car is at Z, and the driving profile does not match any known driver. Even more so if you were driving somewhere you had not gone before - to the [docks](https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/port-of-montreal-a-theft-hub-for-toronto-s-stolen-vehicles-shipped-abroad/article_e2049b4a-d9b4-5360-9b5a-b09cd479336a.html) where other stolen cars have gone? And by driver profile I mean the way we use the gas and brakes and steering. Or even what we do with the entertainment system and other car settings. Sending a quick text message to verify could detect the theft all that much more quickly - and perhaps intervening with police assistance would be more useful than just shutting the car down. Maybe a theft ring could be exposed.

